[HIV] Example of quantitative analysis of natural selection
=========================================================== In 1983 the
infectious agent responsible of the well-known disease of Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) was identified. It was called Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Despite this discovery of fundamental
importance, at the present there is no cure for this disease and no effective
vaccine against HIV infection. The main difficulty is that our immune system
as well as any drugs cannot deal with the inner nature of this virus that
evolves constantly and rapidly. The genome of HIV has been sequenced hundreds
of time since the eighties, so it is possible to study the differences between
many individual genomes. This can help us to gain a general understanding of
how virus evolves. In particular there are specific regions of its proteins
that are recognized and attacked by our immune system: these regions mostly
show the signature of adaptive evolution of the changing virus. Other regions
instead remain invariant having important biological functions and not being
involved in interactions with the immune system. In this example a genome wide
analysis of natural selection in HIV is performed.


[HUMANS] Example of sequence comparison by genetic distance
=========================================================== The discovery of
Neanderthal skeletons in various parts of Europe raised many questions about
human origis, among them the issue of our relation with these species. Now
many questions about human and primate origins have been answered by the study
of the mitochondrial genome and in particular of the hypervariable regions.
These regions presents high sequence variability among humans, therefore they
are ideal for studying the relationships among individuals. There are two
hypervariable regions called HVR-I and HVR-II.


[OLFACTORYRECEPTORS] Example of use of HMM in sequence analysis
=============================================================== Proteins are
composed of a sequence of amino acids. These aminoacids have various atomic
compositions and structures that lead to different properties. The first part
of this demo focuses on the property of hydrophobicity.

Olfactory receptors (OR) are part of a family of proteins that have 7
transmembrane regions. That is they pass through the cell membrane 7 times.
The interior of the cell membrane is hydrophobic while both the exterior and
interior of the cell are hydrophilic. Therefore, the regions of the protein
that pass through the membrane should contain mostly hydrophobic amino acids
while the portion outside of the membrane should be mostly hydrophilic.


[DAUER] Example of gene expression profile analysis
=================================================== It is known that gene
expression in eukaryotes is regulated by transcription factor (TF) through
binding to a short piece of DNA in the upstream region. With the emerging of
large-scale gene expression and genomic sequence studies, one could identify
by which transcription factors a certain gene is regulated and predict how the
gene will act subjected to change of environment, based on the presence of TF
binding sites in its upstream sequence. With the gene expression data, genes
can be clustered on the basis of the similarity of their expression profiles
and these clusters are likely to contain genes that are regulated by the same
transcription factors. Searches for cis-regulatory elements can then be
undertaken in the upstream regions of the clustered genes. In this example we
identify the cis-regulatory elements present in the genes responsible to the
dauer exit process in Caenorhabditis elegans. C. elegans is a small soil
nematode found in temperate regions. The dauer is an important developmental
transition in C. elegans that exhibits increased longevity, stress resistance,
altered metabolism compared with normal worms. The transition from the dauer
state to the non-dauer state is performed here by detecting significant change
of expression profiles of genes between the two states. The temporal
expression of genes are measured by microarray at 10 to 12 time points every
one or two hours. In detail we have the expression profile of 1984 genes
within 12 hours, sampled approximately once an hour.


[ICEMAN] Example of phylogenetic analysis
========================================= Ötzi the Iceman is a well-preserved
natural mummy of a man frozen for about 5300 years and found in 1991 in a
glacier of the Ötztal Alps, near the border between Austria and Italy.
Recently researchers found interesting informations about it from the exam of
mitochondrial DNA taken from cells of the iceman intestine. In particular from
phylogenetic analysis they made some hypotesis about its mitochondrial
haplogroup. A haplogroup is defined by set of characteristic mutations on the
mitochondrial genome. Therefore it can be traced along a person’s maternal
line and it can be used to group populations by genetic features. The famous
book “The Seven Daughters of Eve” by Bryan Sykes describes the classification
of all modern humans into into mitochondrial haplogroups and links each
haplogroup to a specific prehistoric woman (“clan mothers”). In fact the
branches of the mtDNA tree (composed of groups of people with related
haplogroups) are continent-specific. In this example, we analyze the
statistical properties and perform phylogenetic analysis of the mtDNA of the
iceman to investigate the relationship with modern humans of different
geographical locations and to determine useful information about its
haplogroup.

